>> Richard Feldman: Let's go
through the part four exercise.
So we're gonna start off by building and
running the program,
as we've been doing, cool.
So you might notice that we're printing
out what appears to be a gigantic
index.html file, actually two of them.
So it says index.html contents and
then blah blog/index.html contents.
If you look inside the exercises folder,
there are a couple of
extra things in here.
So there's this index.html.
This is like, in addition to the all the
dot c files, and it looks like this says,
like, Hello World.
This through slash page.
In the future,
when we get the actual web server running,
we're gonna literally be like,
serving this to a browser.
But for right now it's just hard
coded in our exercises directory.
And then we also have a blog directory
which has an index.html inside of it,
which just says, this is a blog.
And basically the only purpose of these
two things is just to be able to verify
that like our parsing and
translating things into paths
is actually working correctly.
Cool, so, yeah.
Let's build and ran the program.
Let's take a look at what this is doing.
So this part right here, this two path,
this is gonna look familiar.
This is basically just like, if you take
what happened at the end of the solution
for part three, this is what's there.
So this has the like
the refactor that we did.
So all of this is just stuff that
we've already seen before nothing new
to see there.
We just so still needed it because,
we're building up to a static web server.
Now we're going to have this
new thing called print_file,
which is basically like takes a path.
And this path is gonna be parsed
out of the request from earlier.
And then basically we're going to go
through this whole process that we
just learned about.
So do the open to get the file descriptor,
make the metadata struct,
call fstat to populate it.
Right now, by the way, you might notice
that we are not handling any errors here,
and we're gonna see why by
the end of the exercise,
we've chosen not to handle any errors.
And here we say, change this
charge star to and malloc, sorry.
Change this to charge star and malloc.
So right now,
this is allocating metadata, st_size + 1,
which as we saw from the slides,
this is not safe.
This could very easily blow the stack,
and if we want to avoid that,
malloc is one way to do that.
And by the way, don't forget to handle
the case for malloc returns null,
which is what malloc returns
when there's an error.
So make sure that we handle errors,
because malloc can fail to and
also don't forget to call free
on it at the appropriately making
sure not to use use after free.
Freeze, or double freeze,
or anything like that.
Just call free at the correct times so
that this will free this actual
memory after we malloc it, okay.
And then finally, after we've done that,
then just go back and
add error handling for
all the cases that could happen.
So if you want to see some documentation
for these different functions,
this is like you.
A little bit of a your first taste of,
like, C documentation.
But I do think that learning how to read C
Docs is actually one of the most valuable
things you can take away from this course.
Because if you're trying to do,
interop with another language, or
you're trying to, get a little tiny bit
of C involved in a really performance
critical section of something
you're doing at work.
This is, kind of the way to do that.
And so these links will give you sort of
a little sense of what that can look like.
>> Richard Feldman: Okay, before I
go through the solutions for this,
let me just start by just
bringing this up on the screen so
you can kind of see this for those who
are like not reading this as we go along.
This is the the actual docks for
the the open function.
So this is the Linux version of this.
In part six we're actually gonna see that,
although almost all the time
the versions of these things
are identical for our purposes.
At the very end of the workshop,
we are gonna encounter a case where there
actually is a slight and very important
difference between how a particular
function works on Linux versus on how it
works in BSD, which is the same MAC OS.
And we actually are gonna have to
account for that difference, but for
the rest of the workshop,
you can just get away with looking for
either the Linux docs or the BSD docs.
And I think the Linux docs are a little
easier to read, but basically,
like this is a pretty
representative example of like,
what it looks like to read docs for
Linux, like C functions.
You can just kind of search for
these on the web and just like open and
then like maybe Linux or something like
that, or even just like open and then see,
and you'll get a lot of
results from this website.
This is man7.org.
And basically, here's what it looks like.
You've got a variety of related functions.
They're sort of all
defined in the same place.
They're whoever wrote the docs decided to
organize them this way, so here's open.
Basically, all of these things are things
that we have at some point seen.
So const char, we haven't seen.
I mean we saw const, but
in a different context where
it was sort of out at the top.
And again, this just means, basically,
you're not supposed to write into this.
This is the pathname to open.
So this is a char star,
so terminated string int.
We know about that one.
That's the flag.
So this is,
like the read only flag that we put there,
the dot dot dot basically means Varg.
So it means that you can optionally
send additional arguments.
And then this is just a little comment
saying that, like, hey, there's like, one
var arg that you're allowed to send, and
it should be one of these mode t things.
Mode_t is a struct that.
That specifies, or actually, sorry, it
might be flags, not sure, but the type for
this is defined somewhere else.
But this is basically like
if you want the, yeah,
some additional configuration around
how you want to open the file.
Then there's other functions like create
and open app and open app two and
stuff like that.
We don't need to worry about these, but
the point is just that like
this is our first example of.
Now we've learned enough that we can
actually start reading C documentation,
which opens up a whole world
of exciting things to us.
All right, having said all that, let's go
ahead and go through these two things.
So, [COUGH] Okay, first one is we're gonna
change this to char star and malloc.
So we're gonna say char
star buff = malloc and
we're gonna get an error at first
because this is not imported.
We're gonna import stdlib.h.
Actually, let me just go ahead and
do that, right there.
Okay, stdlib.h.
Great, and jump back there.
Okay, and how much do we want to malloc?
So malloc takes as its one argument,
how many bytes do you want to allocate,
which is essentially the same
exact things we have in there.
So metadata.st_size + 1.
As usual, we got the plus one because we
want to have a null terminator in there,
because this is going to be a string
that we're gonna write out.
Okay, great, so
we've got this thing right here.
It's giving us a little error,
because I have both of these
defined at the same time, but.
So that's all we're gonna do there.
So hint one, don't forget to handle
the case where malloc returns null.
Thanks very much.
So let's go ahead and
handle that real quick.
If buff double equals null,
then we're just gonna return
without printing anything.
So this will essentially mean that make
sure that we're not causing any problems
with like read trying to write into
null right there because that would
immediately cause all sorts of explosions.
And then, of course, don't forget to
free buff later to prevent memory leaks.
So right down at the end here where
we're closing the FD, let's free that.
Great, okay, looking good.
All right, there's that.
Let's run the program again.
And sure enough, everything looks great.
We are now printing both of these files
and we're doing it with malloc and free.
I don't see what all the fuss is about.
That was no proble,
we just added a little free in there.
All right, and now finally let's go
back and add error handling 'cause we
omitted that earlier, so
let's go ahead and just do that.
Here are the docs for all these things.
So if you look at the docs for
open, you can see that.
It will say, hey, if FD is -1,
then that means an error happened.
And again, normally, we would like,
handle this more gracefully.
Print out, hey, no, I couldn't open this
path, not found or something like that.
Maybe look at what specific
error had happened.
But for our purposes, we're just like,
yeah, just return no problem.
So that's that one.
Then we have stat which can
also fail sorry, fstat.
So gonna say, if this is w = -1 here,
we're not bothering to introduce
a variable because we're, we would only
read it for error handling anyway.
So just go ahead and do that.
Okay, all right.
And read, okay, where is read there.
It is great.
And now I can just say if bytes_read w =
-1 return and malloc, or is that one?
We already did malloc, right?
Yeah, great, okay, yeah,
we can print of that an error handle, but
I'm not going to bother.
All right,
let me run the program again and
we're all good because none of those error
cases even came up and we're all done and
everything is perfect and
I didn't make any mistakes, right?
Anyone see anything I didn't do correctly?
Here's a question.
Let's suppose that I'm coming
along here and I'm like,
I called malloc here and remember malloc.
Does a long lived allocation on the heap
that outlives the function, and then it's
very important that we make sure to free
that, otherwise we have a memory leak.
So let's suppose we're coming down here,
and we get down here and we're like, cool.
We freed that.
We didn't forget very good.
Did anyone notice that we didn't free it?
Nope, we had a memory leak.
[LAUGH] This is the problem, if you
don't have any conditionals, yeah, sure,
it's no problem.
It's just free, no big deal.
The problem is, real programs actually
have lots of conditionals, and
you have to remember to do that.
Here's another question.
This one will be a little bit easier.
Do we always close the file?
>> Speaker 2: No.
>> Richard Feldman: Nope, [LAUGH] yeah,
what if bites red was negative one?
>> Speaker 2: We did an early return.
>> Richard Feldman: We
never reached this line.
So yeah, we needed to close there too.
What about up here?
Okay, if buff = null, we don't need
to free it because it was null, so
it didn't get allocated
in the first place.
But we did actually need to
close the file descriptor there.
What if this happened?
Yeah, I also need you to close
the file descriptor there.
But here we need to not free because
we haven't done the malloc yet.
So, and then again here we don't need to
close the file descriptor because this is
for equals one which means that
there was no file descriptor.
This is the problem.
This is why it's so easy to make these
mistakes is because we're not usually
accustomed to thinking in terms of yeah,
it's just this chore, right?
We're like, open it.
And then just remember
to close it at the end.
You're done.
You malloc it.
And then just remember to free
at the end and you're done.
It's not actually that simple
because in real world programs,
you do have all sorts of
conditionals going on.
You have early returns.
You have things that like only happen
sometimes and other times don't happen.
And you have to remember to close
things in just the right spot,
like close your file descriptors
in just the right spot.
And to free your malix
in just the right spots.
And again, as we talked earlier,
if you don't remember to free at just
the right time, you get a memory leak.
If you free too early,
you get a use after free,
which is way worse than a memory leak.
And if you free multiple times, and
we are calling free, multiple times in
this function, then you get a double free
which is even worse than a use after free.
This is how C gets a reputation for
its memory on safety,
causing problems deservedly.
So, because this does
really cause problems.
Now one, right, you can go with this is
you can go with rust, which basically,
you don't have clothes entry in rust and
rust.
It just takes care of all
these things automatically for
you with plenty of other trade-offs,
if you want to learn all about that,
I have a whole course on Rust that you
can watch right here on Final Masters.
But it's also worth noting that, again,
if we choose not to use
malloc in the first place.
If we're going to do our chunked reads
anyway, and we're gonna just do them on
the stack, then I don't need
to worry about any of this.
I don't need to do the free thing because
I have chosen to organize my program in
a way where I didn't have to use malloc
and therefore I don't have to use free and
the entire category of
bugs just goes away.
Granted, other trade offs happen,
but I get better performance, and
I don't have to manage these lifetimes and
worry about what I'm like on the hook to
close it or free at just the right time.
Unfortunately, when it
comes to file descriptors,
there's kind of no way around it, like you
just do need to remember to call close at,
like, just the right times
that if you mess that up.
Then you have a file descriptor leak
on the plus side, file descriptor leaks
are generally not they tend not to be as
consequential as memory leaks, although,
granted.
It can be kind of annoying if you
have a very long running program, but
eventually you run out
of file descriptors.
That is annoying.
One other note about this
is that this right here,
is actually one of the major things
that the sort of C successor languages
that are not in the like c++ or
rust family.
So this is like Zig, Jai and Odin.
I believe all three of them do this is
that they have a keyword called Defer.
And basically what defer lets you do is
that I'm just gonna make up syntactic
because c does not have this is you
basically say something like this, defer.
I guess that would probably be down here,
actually.
So C, if it's negative one,
if so early return.
And then basically what defer means is
basically like at the end of the function,
whenever the function returns,
whether that's just because
the function naturally ended.
Or because we did an early return, just
make sure you always do this close fd.
And then now you wouldn't need this,
and you wouldn't need this, and
you wouldn't need this, and you could do
the same thing for free if you wanted to.
Now, granted, that only works if, like
you're doing this inside the scope of this
one function, like, if that works fine for
closing a file descriptor.
But if the whole point of the malloc that
you're doing is that you want to return.
The thing that it malloced from the
function then defer doesn't really help
you, whereas, like the things
that rust does do help you.
But it is worth noting that, especially
for things like file descriptors,
this is a major ergonomics improvement
that these languages give you.
And I have heard talk about people
trying to add this to C, or, like,
writing proposals to do that, but
C being a 50 plus your old language.
New features don't just
get added on a whim.
[LAUGH] it's like a long process to
get things through the standards.
So who knows if we'll ever actually see
a deferred keyword in C, but fortunately,
these other sort of C improvement
languages already do have that.